The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Oedipus Trilogy, by Sophocles

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Oedipus Trilogy

Author: Sophocles

Translator: F. Storr

Release Date: March 7, 2006 [EBook #31]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OEDIPUS TRILOGY ***




Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer and David Widger





                              SOPHOCLES

                           OEDIPUS THE KING

                     Translation by F. Storr, BA
            Formerly Scholar of Trinity College, Cambridge
                    From the Loeb Library Edition
                       Originally published by
               Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
                                 and
                    William Heinemann Ltd, London

                       First published in 1912

                               *****

                               ARGUMENT

To Laius, King of Thebes, an oracle foretold that the child born to him
by his queen Jocasta would slay his father and wed his mother. So when
in time a son was born the infant's feet were riveted together and he
was left to die on Mount Cithaeron. But a shepherd found the babe and
tended him, and delivered him to another shepherd who took him to his
master, the King of Corinth. Polybus being childless adopted the boy,
who grew up believing that he was indeed the King's son. Afterwards
doubting his parentage he inquired of the Delphic god and heard himself
the word declared before to Laius. Wherefore he fled from what he
deemed his father's house and in his flight he encountered and
unwillingly slew his father Laius. Arriving at Thebes he answered the
riddle of the Sphinx and the grateful Thebans made their deliverer king.
So he reigned in the room of Laius, and espoused the widowed queen.
Children were born to them and Thebes prospered under his rule, but
again a grievous plague fell upon the city. Again the oracle was
consulted and it bade them purge themselves of blood-guiltiness. Oedipus
denounces the crime of which he is unaware, and undertakes to track out
the criminal. Step by step it is brought home to him that he is the man.
The closing scene reveals Jocasta slain by her own hand and Oedipus
blinded by his own act and praying for death or exile.

                              *****

                          DRAMATIS PERSONAE

                               Oedipus.

                         The Priest of Zeus.

                                Creon.

                       Chorus of Theban Elders.

                              Teiresias.

                               Jocasta.

                              Messenger.

                            Herd of Laius.

                          Second Messenger.

            Scene:  Thebes.  Before the Palace of Oedipus.

                              *****

                           OEDIPUS THE KING



Suppliants of all ages are seated round the altar at the palace doors,
at their head a PRIEST OF ZEUS.  To them enter OEDIPUS.

OEDIPUS
My children, latest born to Cadmus old,
Why sit ye here as suppliants, in your hands
Branches of olive filleted with wool?
What means this reek of incense everywhere,
And everywhere laments and litanies?
Children, it were not meet that I should learn
From others, and am hither come, myself,
I Oedipus, your world-renowned king.
Ho! aged sire, whose venerable locks
Proclaim thee spokesman of this company,
Explain your mood and purport.  Is it dread
Of ill that moves you or a boon ye crave?
My zeal in your behalf ye cannot doubt;
Ruthless indeed were I and obdurate
If such petitioners as you I spurned.

PRIEST
Yea, Oedipus, my sovereign lord and king,
Thou seest how both extremes of age besiege
Thy palace altars--fledglings hardly winged,
and greybeards bowed with years; priests, as am I
of Zeus, and these the flower of our youth.
Meanwhile, the common folk, with wreathed boughs
Crowd our two market-places, or before
Both shrines of Pallas congregate, or where
Ismenus gives his oracles by fire.
For, as thou seest thyself, our ship of State,
Sore buffeted, can no more lift her head,
Foundered beneath a weltering surge of blood.
A blight is on our harvest in the ear,
A blight upon the grazing flocks and herds,
A blight on wives in travail; and withal
Armed with his blazing torch the God of Plague
Hath swooped upon our city emptying
The house of Cadmus, and the murky realm
Of Pluto is full fed with groans and tears.
     Therefore, O King, here at thy hearth we sit,
I and these children; not as deeming thee
A new divinity, but the first of men;
First in the common accidents of life,
And first in visitations of the Gods.
Art thou not he who coming to the town
of Cadmus freed us from the tax we paid
To the fell songstress?  Nor hadst thou received
Prompting from us or be